We’d like to begin our discussion
with the importance of buying truth
personally.
No one else can do that for us.
And then we’ll talk just for a moment
about how much effort it takes to do that.
Let’s begin our discussion
with something that happened
to King David of Israel.
He wanted to buy a threshing floor
from a man named Araunah.
And he wanted to offer up
sacrifices to Jehovah.
But Araunah the landowner said,
‘Look, David, take the threshing floor.
‘I’ll give you the cattle.
I’ll give you whatever you need.
Just take it and worship Jehovah.’
But how did David respond?
At 2 Samuel 24:24, he said this:
“I will not offer up to Jehovah my God
burnt sacrifices
that cost me nothing.”
David realized that it had to be
his personal sacrifice
in order for it to have value.
Likewise, when we buy truth,
we have to pay for it, in effect, ourselves.
How much effort does it take?
Well, let’s open our Bibles
to the book of 2 Peter chapter 1,
and let’s look
at a couple of expressions here
that will help us to appreciate
the effort that’s required.
Second Peter 1:5:
“For this very reason,
put forth all earnest effort
“to supply to your faith virtue,
to your virtue knowledge.”
So we’re always having to add, to supply,
to our knowledge of the truth.
And what kind of effort?
—earnest effort, sincere,
strenuous with depth of feeling,
conscientious.
And how about this matter
of supplying knowledge?
The original Greek noun here used
meant “leader of a chorus.”
What does that have to do with supply?
Well, back in the day when this was written,
if a city wanted to put on a stage play
and they had a chorus,
men of the city who had money
would actually go into their own pockets
and pay for the training and the maintenance
of that chorus for the city.
They had to spend a lot,
but they were willing to do it for what they
considered to be a worthy cause.
So it was a personal sacrifice on their part.
So likewise, no one else can
read for us, study for us,
research for us, meditate for us.
It has to be personal,
and it has to be done sincerely.
But now, even though we get the truth
(and we’re glad that we have),
we want to make sure
that we never sell it, we never lose it.
Now, these expressions “buy” and “sell,”
they’re business expressions, aren’t they?
Well, let’s see what principles in the Bible
can help us
to be on guard against the Devil
and this system,
who are always trying to get us to sell,
or to get rid of, our truth.
Let’s go this time
to the book of Proverbs chapter 20,
and we want to look at verse 14
—Proverbs 20:14.
Now, this is a dishonest businessman,
and notice what he does:
“‘It is no good, it is no good!’
says the buyer;
then he goes away and boasts about himself.”
So he sees something he wants.
But he doesn’t want to pay them the value,
so he runs down the product; he criticizes
and makes it look like it’s inferior.
And then the seller,
if he’s not aware and alert,
will actually sell his product
for far less than it’s worth,
for practically nothing.
And then this dishonest buyer goes off,
and he brags about it.
Well, buyers are not the only ones
that can be dishonest.
Sellers can be dishonest too, can’t they?
“This is the product you need.
It’s exactly what you want.”
But they don’t tell you
about the long history of problems
that it has.
They don’t tell you about the cost
that it takes to maintain it
and the difficulties that come
with owning that product.
All they want you to do
is buy this beautiful product.
Well, how can we take that principle
and apply it to what Satan
and his system tries to do to us?
Jehovah warned about those who say this,
as recorded at Isaiah 5:20:
“Woe to those who say that good is bad
and bad is good.”
So Satan, with all of his cunning
and his deception,
will try to say to us:
“You know the truth that you purchased?
“That was a bad purchase.
“It’s too burdensome.
“It took away your freedom.
“You lost your independence.
“Now, I’ve got some products
that will really make you happy right now.”
Well, we know that in the business world,
the buyer always has to separate the facts
from the salesman’s empty, or foolish, talk,
or his nonsense.
Not all salesmen are like that, but many are.
So we have to be careful that we don’t buy
into something that seems so good,
but in reality, doesn’t have value at all.
So how do we fight all of this propaganda
from the system of things around us
to make us feel that we made
a bad purchase with the truth?
Well, we have a very good example in Jesus.
Remember the time when the Devil came
to him, as recorded in Matthew chapter 4,
and the Devil said to him,
‘I’m going to give you all the kingdoms
of the world and their glory,
and all you have to do
is one act of worship to me.’
How did Jesus respond?
“Go away, Satan!”
He knew that that was a lie,
and he knew it was nonsense.
But how did he support and protect his truth?
He went to the truth.
He said to Satan: “It is written:
“‘It is Jehovah your God you must worship,
and it is to him alone
you must render sacred service.’”
Well, that was the truth from God’s Word,
and that’s how we can protect our truth
that we’ve worked so hard
to obtain and to maintain.
We use the Scriptures,
the truth from Jehovah,
to defend our precious purchase.
So may we continue to do that
and not be fooled by this system of things
and all of its glitter that it says
it wants to give to us.
Now, when considering
what we’ve talked about thus far
—personal effort
and never letting the truth go
because we view it as so valuable—
we can talk just briefly
about the apostle Paul.
At Acts 22:3,
he talked about his previous education,
obtaining knowledge,
and he said: ‘I was educated
at the feet of Gamaliel,
‘instructed according to the strictness
of the ancestral Law,
and zealous for God.’
Saul, as he was known then,
was being trained at the feet of one
of the most famous and renowned teachers
in the first century, Gamaliel.
Well, what did Gamaliel teach?
He promoted belief in the oral law,
and he placed greater emphasis
on the oral law
than the inspired Scriptures.
So when the Hebrew Scriptures
didn’t say specifically or explicitly
what a person should do,
men like Gamaliel came up with all of these
oral traditions through the years.
And they knew them well, and the rabbis
would make the decision for the person,
not the person.
In fact, Gamaliel was so esteemed
that he was the first to be called rabban,
which was a title higher than a rabbi.
And Paul had to learn
all of this oral tradition.
And research shows that it was
a very painstaking,
relentless training program,
where they had to memorize
all of these voluminous laws
and make it their own.
There would be benefits in the secular world
—prestige.
But when Paul learned the truth,
what did he do?
He came to appreciate Mark 7:7, 8,
when Jesus said:
“It is in vain that they keep worshipping me,
“for they teach commands of men as doctrines.
You let go of the commandment of God
and cling to the tradition of men.”
So Paul understood that he thought
he had something of value,
but it was all in vain.
And from the time that he accepted
and bought the truth,
he never let it go, did he?
Regardless of the pain and the suffering
and the sacrifices he made,
he considered it all worth it.
What a fine example of personally buying
at great sacrifice!
And as the years went by,
Paul never sold the truth, did he?
At Philippians chapter 3,
he talked about his life as a servant of God,
and he had no regrets.
He said what he gave up
was “a lot of refuse,”
and the original terms there
could indicate dung or food garbage.
He made the right purchase, didn’t he?
And when he taught
and when he wrote under inspiration,
we do not hear the apostle Paul say,
“When I was with Gamaliel,
this is what he said”
or “Gamaliel would do this in this case.”
Never.
He always went back to the real truth,
the truth from Jehovah’s inspired Word.
What a fine example for us all!
So, what have we learned this morning?
Truth is valuable, and it’s worth
every personal effort to obtain it.
But be careful.
Don’t let the Devil fool us into believing
we made a bad purchase.
Resist the Devil and this system.
And as a result, we’ll have no regrets
over our decision.
We will always be so grateful
that we took the time and effort
to buy truth, and we’ve held on to it.
And then the God of truth
will reward us with everlasting life.